These are some initial thoughts for a domestication bottleneck paper.

August 4, 2014

Working title: Demographics and selection during the maize
domestication bottleneck

Observations thus far:
	     1. We observe an excess of high frequency derived alleles
	     (1d and 2d sfs)
	     2. Tajima's D is higher in coding regions than in
	     non-coding regions
	     3. The observed 2d sfs can broadly be described via the
	     domestication process that is already accepted.

Study questions:
      1. Does demography alone explain the observed patterns of
      nucleotide variability?
      2. Does purifying selection on maize explain the observed
      patterns of nucleotide variability?
      3. Do classic sweeps explain the observed patterns of nucleotide
      variability?
      4. Do soft sweeps explain the observed patterns of nucleotide
      variability?
      5. Do soft sweeps explain the observed patterns of nucleotide
      variability?
      6. Do combinations of the above explain the observed patterns of
      nucleotide variability?

Study methods:
      1. Demography explanation:
      	 i. Comparisons: genes vs. non-genes, CNS vs. NNS
	    a. Already done this to a certain extent, different genes
      	    in functional elements (genes, so far) suggest that demography
      	    is only part of the explanation.

      2. Purifying selection:
      	 i. Deleterious alleles in teosinte vs maize (should not be
      	 equal if purifying selection has been stronger in maize)

      3. Classic sweeps:
      	 i. I hypothesize this is an unlikely explanation given the
      	 mutation rate and recent split between maize and teosinte.
	 ii. Test using methods from Hernandez et al, 2011 Science
      	 paper (humans), look at average diversity as a function of
      	 distance to nearest gene/exon/CNS.
	 iii. Perform simulations.

      4. Soft sweeps:
      	 i. I hypothisize that this is a large part of the observed
      	 levels of nucleotide variability in maize. Soft sweeps are
      	 expected from a bottleneck, as we know occured during maize
      	 domestication.
	 ii. Hard to test, since soft sweeps leave a weak pattern of
      	 selection in the genome. Thoughts needed here...
	 iii. Simulations may be used to determine whether the
      	 observed data can be explained via widespread soft sweeps.

      5. Partial sweeps:
      	 i. Whether arising from new mutations or standing variation,
      	 partial sweeps can lead to increased variation, may be a part
      	 of the reason for elevated Tajima's D. Also, these might be
      	 expected due to many favorable maize traits being highly
      	 quantitative (and probably polygenic).
	 ii. Perhaps test for these by looking for enrichment of
      	 regions with elevated diversity in maize functional regions
      	 (genes, CNS) compared to teosinte.

Predicted abstract/introduction (just to organize thoughts):
	  Yada, yada, yada... We find that models consisting of only
	  demographic history, purifying selection, and classic (hard)
	  sweeps provide an insufficient explanation for the observed
	  patterns of nucleotide diversity in maize. Conversely,
	  widespread soft sweeps and partial sweeps are likely to have
	  played a primary role in shaping the maize genome. This is
	  evidenced by X, Y, and Z. Herein, we first develop a
	  demographic model that is a refinement of previous estimates
	  of the maize domestication process based on the joint sfs
	  between maize and teosinte at only noncoding sites. Next, we
	  demonstrate that this model alone, even when coupled with
	  rampant purifying selection, does not adequately explain the
	  observed data. Finally, we test the hypothesis that soft
	  sweeps (selection on standing variation) coupled with
	  partial sweeps (selection to intermediate frequencies) were
	  common during maize domestication, and we establish that
	  these forces are the primary driver of the patterns of
	  variability observed in maize. ... Yada, yada, yada.
